CS 61A

Lecture Notes Week 14

Topic: Lazy evaluator, 

Reading: Abelson & Sussman, Section 4.2, 4.3

Lazy evaluator. To load the lazy metacircular evaluator, say

•
(load "~cs61a/lib/lazy.scm")

Streams require careful attention

To make streams of pairs, the text uses this procedure:

;;;;;
(define (pairs s t)

(cons-stream

In file cs61a/lectures/4.2/pairs.scm

(list (stream-car s) (stream-car t))
(interleave

(stream-map (lambda (x) (list (stream-car s) x))

(stream-cdr t))
(pairs (stream-cdr s) (stream-cdr t)))))

In exercise 3.68, Louis Reasoner suggests this simpler version:

(define (pairs s t)

(interleave

(stream-map (lambda (x) (list (stream-car s) x)) t)
(pairs (stream-cdr s) (stream-cdr t))))

Of course you know because it’s Louis that this doesn’t work. But why not? The answer is that interleave
is an ordinary procedure, so its arguments are evaluated right away, including the recursive call. So there is
an inﬁnite recursion before any pairs are generated. The book’s version uses cons-stream, which is a special
form, and so what looks like a recursive call actually isn’t—at least not right away.

But in principle Louis is right! His procedure does correctly specify what the desired result should contain.
It fails because of a detail in the implementation of streams. In a perfect world, a mathematically correct
program such as Louis’s version ought to work on the computer.

In section 3.5.4 they solve a similar problem by making the stream programmer use explicit delay invocations.
(You skipped over that section because it was about calculus.) Here’s how Louis could use that technique:

(define (interleave-delayed s1 delayed-s2)

(if (stream-null? s1)

(force delayed-s2)
(cons-stream

(stream-car s1)
(interleave-delayed (force delayed-s2)

(delay (stream-cdr s1))))))

(define (pairs s t)

(interleave-delayed

(stream-map (lambda (x) (list (stream-car s) x)) t)
(delay (pairs (stream-cdr s) (stream-cdr t)))))

This works, but it’s far too horrible to contemplate; with this technique, the stream programmer has to
check carefully every procedure to see what might need to be delayed explicitly. This defeats the object of
an abstraction. The user should be able to write a stream program just as if it were a list program, without
any idea of how streams are implemented!

359

Lazy evaluation: delay everything automatically

Back in chapter 1 we learned about normal order evaluation, in which argument subexpressions are not
evaluated before calling a procedure. In eﬀect, when you type

(foo a b c)

in a normal order evaluator, it’s equivalent to typing

(foo (delay a) (delay b) (delay c))

in ordinary (applicative order) Scheme.
procedure will work without adding explicit delays.

If every argument is automatically delayed, then Louis’s pairs

Louis’s program had explicit calls to force as well as explicit calls to delay. If we’re going to make this
process automatic, when should we automatically force a promise? The answer is that some primitives need
to know the real values of their arguments, e.g., the arithmetic primitives. And of course when Scheme is
about to print the value of a top-level expression, we need the real value.

How do we modify the evaluator?

What changes must we make to the metacircular evaluator in order to get normal order?

We’ve just said that the point at which we want to automatically delay a computation is when an expression
is used as an argument to a procedure. Where does the ordinary metacircular evaluator evaluate argument
subexpressions? In this excerpt from eval:

(define (eval exp env)

(cond ...

((application? exp)

(apply (eval (operator exp) env)

(list-of-values (operands exp) env)))

...))

It’s list-of-values that recursively calls eval for each argument. Instead we could make thunks:

(define (eval exp env)

(cond ...

((application? exp)

(apply (ACTUAL-VALUE (operator exp) env)

(LIST-OF-DELAYED-VALUES (operands exp) env)))

...))

Two things have changed:

1. To ﬁnd out what procedure to invoke, we use actual-value rather than eval. In the normal order
evaluator, what eval returns may be a promise rather than a ﬁnal value; actual-value forces the promise
if necessary.

2. Instead of list-of-values we call list-of-delayed-values. The ordinary version uses eval to get the
value of each argument expression; the new version will use delay to make a list of thunks. (This isn’t quite
true, and I’ll ﬁx it in a few paragraphs.)

When do we want to force the promises? We do it when calling a primitive procedure. That happens in
apply:

(define (apply procedure arguments)

(cond ((primitive-procedure? procedure)

(apply-primitive-procedure procedure arguments))

...))

360

We change it to force the arguments ﬁrst:

(define (apply procedure arguments)

(cond ((primitive-procedure? procedure)

(apply-primitive-procedure procedure (MAP FORCE ARGUMENTS)))

...))

Those are the crucial changes. The book gives a few more details: Some special forms must force their
arguments, and the read-eval-print loop must force the value it’s about to print.

Reinventing delay and force

I said earlier that I was lying about using delay to make thunks. The metacircular evaluator can’t use
Scheme’s built-in delay because that would make a thunk in the underlying Scheme environment, and we
want a thunk in the metacircular environment. (This is one more example of the idea of level confusion.)
Instead, the book uses procedures delay-it and force-it to implement metacircular thunks.

What’s a thunk? It’s an expression and an environment in which we should later evaluate it. So we make
one by combining an expression with an environment:

(define (delay-it exp env)
(list ’thunk exp env))

The rest of the implementation is straightforward.

Notice that the delay-it procedure takes an environment as argument; this is because it’s part of the
implementation of the language, not a user-visible feature. If, instead of a lazy evaluator, we wanted to add
a delay special form to the ordinary metacircular evaluator, we’d do it by adding this clause to eval:

((delay? exp) (delay-it (cadr exp) env))

Here exp represents an expression like (delay foo) and so its cadr is the thing we really want to delay.

The book’s version of eval and apply in the lazy evaluator is a little diﬀerent from what I’ve shown here.
My version makes thunks in eval and passes them to apply. The book’s version has eval pass the argument
expressions to apply, without either evaluating or thunking them, and also passes the current environment
as a third argument. Then apply either evaluates the arguments (for primitives) or thunks them (for non-
primitives). Their way is more eﬃcient, but I think this way makes the issues clearer because it’s more
nearly parallel to the division of labor between eval and apply in the vanilla metacircular evaluator.

Memoization

Why didn’t we choose normal order evaluation for Scheme in the ﬁrst place? One reason is that it easily
leads to redundant computations. When we talked about it in chapter 1, I gave this example:

(define (square x) (* x x))

(square (square (+ 2 3)))

In a normal order evaluator, this adds 2 to 3 four times!

(square (square (+ 2 3))) ==>
(* (square (+ 2 3)) (square (+ 2 3))) ==>
(* (* (+ 2 3) (+ 2 3)) (* (+ 2 3) (+ 2 3)))

The solution is memoization. If we force the same thunk more than once, the thunk should remember its
value from the ﬁrst time and not have to repeat the computation. (The four instances of (+ 2 3) in the
last line above are all the same thunk forced four times, not four separate thunks.)

The details are straightforward; you can read them in the text.

361

Nondeterministic evaluator

•
To load the nondeterministic metacircular evaluator, say

(load "~cs61a/lib/ambeval.scm")

Solution spaces, streams, and backtracking

Many problems are of the form “Find all A such that B” or “ﬁnd an A such that B.” For example: Find an
even integer that is not the sum of two primes; ﬁnd a set of integers a, b, c, and n such that an + bn = cn
and n > 2. (These problems might not be about numbers: Find all the states in the United States whose
ﬁrst and last letters are the same.)

In each case, the set A (even integers, sets of four integers, or states) is called the solution space. The
condition B is a predicate function of a potential solution that’s true for actual solutions.

One approach to solving problems of this sort is to represent the solution space as a stream, and use
stream-filter to select the elements that satisfy the predicate:

(stream-filter sum-of-two-primes? even-integers)

(stream-filter Fermat? (pairs (pairs integers integers)

(pairs integers integers)))

(stream-filter (lambda (x) (equal? (first x) (last x))) states)

The stream technique is particularly elegant for inﬁnite problem spaces, because the program seems to be
generating the entire solution space A before checking the predicate B. (Of course we know that really the
steps of the computation are reordered so that the elements are tested as they are generated.)

This week we consider a diﬀerent way to express the same sort of computation, a way that makes the
sequence of events in time more visible. In eﬀect we’ll say:

Pick a possible solution.

See if it’s really a solution.

•

•

If so, return it; if not, try another.

•
Here’s an example of the notation:

> (let ((a (amb 2 3 4))

(b (amb 6 7 8)))

(require (= (remainder b a) 0))
(list a b))

(2 6)
> try-again
(2 8)
> try-again
(3 6)
> try-again
(4 8)
> try-again
There are no more solutions.

362

The main new thing here is the special form amb. This is not part of ordinary Scheme! We are adding it as
a new feature in the metacircular evaluator. Amb takes any number of argument expressions and returns the
value of one of them. You can think about this using either of two metaphors:

The computer clones itself into as many copies as there are arguments; each clone gets a diﬀerent value.

•

The computer magically knows which argument will give rise to a solution to your problem and chooses

•
that one.

What really happens is that the evaluator chooses the ﬁrst argument and returns its value, but if the
computation later fails then it tries again with the second argument, and so on until there are no more to
try. This introduces another new idea: the possibility of the failure of a computation. That’s not the same
thing as an error! Errors (such as taking the car of an empty list) are handled the same in this evaluator
as in ordinary Scheme; they result in an error message and the computation stops. A failure is diﬀerent; it’s
what happens when you call amb with no arguments, or when all the arguments you gave have been tried
and there are no more left.

In the example above I used require to cause a failure of the computation if the condition is not met.
Require is a simple procedure in the metacircular Scheme-with-amb:

(define (require condition)

(if (not condition) (amb)))

So here’s the sequence of events in the computation above:

a=2

b=6; 6 is a multiple of 2, so return (2 6)

[try-again]

b=7; 7 isn’t a multiple of 2, so fail.
b=8; 8 is a multiple of 2, so return (2 8)

[try-again]

No more values for b, so fail.

a=3

b=6; 6 is a multiple of 3, so return (3 6)

[try-again]

b=7; 7 isn’t a multiple of 3, so fail.
b=8; 8 isn’t a multiple of 3, so fail.
No more values for b, so fail.

a=4

b=6; 6 isn’t a multiple of 4, so fail.
b=7; 7 isn’t a multiple of 4, so fail.
b=8; 8 is a multiple of 4, so return (4 8)

[try-again]

No more values for b, so fail.

No more values for a, so fail.
(No more pending AMBs, so report failure to user.)

363

Recursive AmbAmbAmb

Since amb accepts any argument expressions, not just literal values as in the example above, it can be used
recursively:

(define (an-integer-between from to)

(if (> from to)

(amb)
(amb from (an-integer-between (+ from 1) to))))

or if you prefer:

(define (an-integer-between from to)

(require (>= to from))
(amb from (an-integer-between (+ from 1) to)))

Further, since amb is a special form and only evaluates one argument at a time, it has the same delaying
eﬀect as cons-stream and can be used to make inﬁnite solution spaces:

(define (integers-from from)

(amb from (integers-from (+ from 1))))

This integers-from computation never fails—there is always another integer—and so it won’t work to say

(let ((a (integers-from 1))

(b (integers-from 1)))

...)

because a will never have any value other than 1, because the second amb never fails. This is analogous to
the problem of trying to append inﬁnite streams; in that case we could solve the problem with interleave
but it’s harder here.

Footnote on order of evaluation

In describing the sequence of events in these examples, I’m assuming that Scheme will evaluate the arguments
of the unnamed procedure created by a let from left to right. If I wanted to be sure of that, I should use
let* instead of let. But it matters only in my description of the sequence of events; considered abstractly,
the program will behave correctly regardless of the order of evaluation, because all possible solutions will
eventually be tried—although maybe not in the order shown here.

Success or failure

In the implementation of amb, the most diﬃcult change to the evaluator is that any computation may either
succeed or fail. The most obvious way to try to represent this situation is to have eval return some special
value, let’s say the symbol =failed=, if a computation fails. (This is analogous to the use of =no-value= in
the Logo interpreter project.) The trouble is that if an amb fails, we don’t want to continue the computation;
we want to “back up” to an earlier stage in the computation. Suppose we are trying to evaluate an expression
such as

(a (b (c (d 4))))

and suppose that procedures b and c use amb. Procedure d is actually invoked ﬁrst; then c is invoked with
the value d returned as argument. The amb inside procedure c returns its ﬁrst argument, and c uses that to
compute a return value that becomes the argument to b. Now suppose that the amb inside b fails. We don’t
want to invoke a with the value =failed= as its argument! In fact we don’t want to invoke a at all; we want
to re-evaluate the body of c but using the second argument to its amb.

A&S take a diﬀerent approach. If an amb fails, they want to be able to jump right back to the previous amb,
without having to propagate the failure explicitly through several intervening calls to eval. To make this

364

work, intuitively, we have to give eval two diﬀerent places to return to when it’s ﬁnished, one for a success
and the other for a failure.

Continuations

Ordinarily a procedure doesn’t think explicitly about where to return; it returns to its caller, but Scheme
takes care of that automatically. For example, when we compute

(* 3 (square 5))

the procedure square computes the value 25 and Scheme automatically returns that value to the eval
invocation that’s waiting to use it as an argument to the multiplication. But we could tell square explicitly,
“when you’ve ﬁgured out the answer, pass it on to be multiplied by 3” this way:

(define (square x continuation)

(continuation (* x x)))

> (square 5 (lambda (y) (* y 3)))
75

A continuation is a procedure that takes your result as argument and says what’s left to be done in the
computation.

Continuations for success and failure

In the case of the nondeterministic evaluator, we give eval two continuations, one for success and one for
failure. Note that these continuations are part of the implementation of the evaluator; the user of amb doesn’t
deal explicitly with continuations.

Here’s a handwavy example. In the case of

(a (b (c (d 4))))

procedure b’s success continuation is something like

(lambda (value) (a value))

but its failure continuation is

(lambda () (a (b (redo-amb-in-c))))

This example is handwavy because these “continuations” are from the point of view of the user of the
metacircular Scheme, who doesn’t know anything about continuations, really. The true continuations are
written in underlying Scheme, as part of the evaluator itself.

If a computation fails, the most recent amb wants to try another value. So a continuation failure will redo
the amb with one fewer argument. There’s no information that the failing computation needs to send back
to that amb except for the fact of failure itself, so the failure continuation procedure needs no arguments.

On the other hand, if the computation succeeds, we have to carry out the success continuation, and that
continuation needs to know the value that we computed. It also needs to know what to do if the continuation
itself fails; most of the time, this will be the same as the failure continuation we were given, but it might
not be. So a success continuation must be a procedure that takes two arguments: a value and a failure
continuation.

The book bases the nondeterministic evaluator on the analyzing one, but I’ll use a simpliﬁed version based
on plain old eval (it’s in cs61a/lib/vambeval.scm).

Most kinds of evaluation always succeed, so they invoke their success continuation and pass on the failure
one. I’ll start with a too-simpliﬁed version of eval-if in this form:

365

(define (eval-if exp env succeed fail)

; WRONG!

(if (eval (if-predicate exp) env succeed fail)

(eval (if-consequent exp) env succeed fail)
(eval (if-alternative exp) env succeed fail)))

The trouble is, what if the evaluation of the predicate fails? We don’t then want to evaluate the consequent
or the alternative. So instead, we just evaluate the predicate, giving it a success continuation that will
evaluate the consequent or the alternative, supposing that evaluating the predicate succeeds.

In general, wherever the ordinary metacircular evaluator would say

(define (eval-foo exp env)

(eval step-1 env)
(eval step-2 env))

using eval twice for part of its work, this version has to eval the ﬁrst part with a continuation that evals
the second part:

(define (eval-foo exp env succeed fail)

(eval step-1

env
(lambda (value-1 fail-1)

(eval step-2 env succeed fail-1))

fail))

(In either case, step-2 presumably uses the result of evaluating step-1 somehow.)

Here’s how that works out for if:

(define (eval-if exp env succeed fail)

(eval (if-predicate exp)

; test the predicate

env
(lambda (pred-value fail2)
(if (true? pred-value)

; with this success continuation

(eval (if-consequent exp) env succeed fail2)
(eval (if-alternative exp) env succeed fail2)))

fail))

; and the same failure continuation

What’s fail2? It’s the failure continuation that the evaluation of the predicate will supply. Most of the time,
that’ll be the same as our own failure continuation, just as eval-if uses fail as the failure continuation to
pass on to the evaluation of the predicate. But if the predicate involves an amb expression, it will generate
a new failure continuation. Think about an example like this one:

> (if (amb #t #f)

(amb 1)
(amb 2))

1

> try-again
2

(A more realistic example would have the predicate expression be some more complicated procedure call that
had an amb in its body.) The ﬁrst thing that happens is that the ﬁrst amb returns #t, and so if evaluates its
second argument, and that second amb returns 1. When the user says to try again, there are no more values
for that amb to return, so it fails. What we must do is re-evaluate the ﬁrst amb, but this time returning its
second argument, #f. By now you’ve forgotten that we’re trying to work out what fail2 is for in eval-if,
but this example shows why the failure continuation when we evaluate if-consequent (namely the (amb 1)
expression) has to be diﬀerent from the failure continuation for the entire if expression. If the entire if

366

fails (which will happen if we say try-again again) then its failure continuation will tell us that there are no
more values. That continuation is bound to the name fail in eval-if. What ends up bound to the name
fail2 is the continuation that re-evaluates the predicate amb.

How does fail2 get that binding? When eval-if evaluates the predicate, which turns out to be an amb
expression, eval-amb will evaluate whatever argument it’s up to, but with a new failure continuation:

(define (eval-amb exp env succeed fail)

(if (null? (cdr exp))

(fail)
(eval (cadr exp)
env
succeed
(lambda ()

; (car exp) is the word AMB
; no more args, call failure cont.
; Otherwise evaluate the first arg

; with my same success continuation
; but with a new failure continuation:

(eval-amb (cons ’amb (cddr exp))

; try the next argument

env
succeed
fail)))))

Notice that eval-if, like most other cases, provides a new success continuation but passes on the same
failure continuation that it was given as an argument. But eval-amb does the opposite: It passes on the
same success continuation it was given, but provides a new failure continuation.

Of course there are a gazillion more details, but the book explains them, once you understand what a con-
tinuation is. The most important of these complications is that anything involving mutation is problematic.
If we say

(define x 5)
(set! x (+ x (amb 2 3)))

it’s clear that the ﬁrst time around x should end up with the value 7 (5 + 2). But if we try again, we’d like x
to get the value 8 (5 + 3), not 10 (7 + 3). So set! must set up a failure continuation that undoes the change
in the binding of x, restoring its original value of 5, before letting the amb provide its second argument.

Note: The second part of programming project 4 is this week.

367