CS 61A

Lecture Notes Week 10

Topic: Client/server paradigm, Concurrency

Reading: Abelson & Sussman, Section 3.4

Client/server programming paradigm

•
Before networks, most programs ran on a single computer. Today it’s common for programs to involve
cooperation between computers. The usual reason is that you want to run a program on your computer that
uses data located elsewhere. A common example is using a browser on your computer to read a web page
stored somewhere else.

To make this cooperation possible, two programs are actually required: the client program on your personal
computer and the server program on the remote computer. Sometimes the client and the server are written
by a single group, but often someone publishes a standard document that allows any client to work with any
server that follows the same standard. For example, you can use Mozilla, Netscape, or Internet Explorer to
read most web pages, because they all follow standards set by the World Wide Web Consortium.

For this course we provide a sample client/server system, implementing a simple Instant Message protocol.
The ﬁles are available in

~cs61a/lib/im-client.scm
~cs61a/lib/im-server.scm

To use them, you must ﬁrst start a server. Load im-server.scm and call the procedure im-server-start;
it will print the IP (Internet Protocol) address of the machine you’re using, along with another number,
the port assigned to the server. Clients will use these numbers to connect to the server. Port numbers are
important because there might be more than one server program running on the same computer, and also
to keep track of connections from more than one client.

(Why don’t you need these numbers when using “real” network software? You don’t need to know the IP
address because your client software knows how to connect to nameservers to translate the host names you
give it into addresses. And most client/server protocols use ﬁxed, registered port numbers that are built into
the software. For example, web browsers use port 80, while the ssh protocol you may use to connect to your
class account from home uses port 22. But our sample client/server protocol doesn’t have a registered port
number, so the operating system assigns a port to the server when you start it.)

To connect to the server, load im-client.scm and call im-enroll with the IP address and port number as
arguments. (Details are in this week’s lab assignment.) Then use the im procedure to send a message to
other people connected to the same server.

This simple implementation uses the Scheme interpreter as its user interface; you send messages by typing
Scheme expressions. Commercial Instant Message clients have a more ornate user interface, that accept
mouse clicks in windows listing other clients to specify the recipient of a message. But our version is realistic
in the way it uses the network; the IM client on your home computer connects to a particular port on a
particular server in order to use the facility. (The only diﬀerence is that a large commercial IM system will
have more than one server; your client connects to the one nearest you, and the servers send messages among
themselves to give the illusion of one big server to which everyone is connected.)

In the news these days, client/server protocols are sometimes contrasted with another approach called peer-
to-peer networking, such as ﬁle-sharing systems like Napster and Kazaa. The distinction is social rather
than strictly technical. In each individual transaction using a peer-to-peer protocol, one machine is acting
as a server and the other as a client. What makes it peer-to-peer networking is that any machine using the
protocol can play either role, unlike the more usual commercial networking idea in which rich companies
operate servers and ordinary people operate clients.

331

Internet primitives in STk

STk deﬁnes sockets, on systems which support them, as ﬁrst class objects. Sockets permit processes to
communicate even if they are on diﬀerent machines. Sockets are useful for creating client-server applications.

(make-client-socket hostname port-number)
(make-client-socket hostname port-number)
(make-client-socket hostname port-number)

make-client-socket returns a new socket object. This socket establishes a link between the running
application listening on port port-number of hostname.

(socket? socket)
(socket? socket)
(socket? socket)

Returns #t if socket is a socket, otherwise returns #f.

(socket-host-name socket)
(socket-host-name socket)
(socket-host-name socket)

Returns a string which contains the name of the distant host attached to socket. If socket was created with
make-client-socket, this procedure returns the oﬃcial name of the distant machine used for connection. If
socket was created with make-server-socket, this function returns the oﬃcial name of the client connected
to the socket. If no client has yet used the socket, this function returns #f.

(socket-host-address socket)
(socket-host-address socket)
(socket-host-address socket)

Returns a string which contains the IP number of the distant host attached to socket.
If socket was
created with make-client-socket, this procedure returns the IP number of the distant machine used for
connection. If socket was created with make-server-socket, this function returns the address of the client
connected to the socket. If no client has yet used the socket, this function returns #f.

(socket-local-address socket)
(socket-local-address socket)
(socket-local-address socket)

Returns a string which contains the IP number of the local host attached to socket.

(socket-port-number socket)
(socket-port-number socket)
(socket-port-number socket)

Returns the integer number of the port used for socket.

(socket-input socket)
(socket-input socket)
(socket-input socket)
(socket-output socket)
(socket-output socket)
(socket-output socket)

Returns the port associated for reading or writing with the program connected with socket. If no connection
has been established, these functions return #f. The following example shows how to make a client socket.
Here we create a socket on port 13 of the machine kaolin.unice.fr. [Port 13 is generally used for testing:
making a connection to it returns the distant system’s idea of the time of day.]

(let ((s (make-client-socket "kaolin.unice.fr" 13)))

(format #t "Time is: ~A\n" (read-line (socket-input s)))
(socket-shutdown s))

(make-server-socket)
(make-server-socket)
(make-server-socket)
(make-server-socket port-number)
(make-server-socket port-number)
(make-server-socket port-number)

make-server-socket returns a new socket object. If port-number is speciﬁed, the socket listens on the
speciﬁed port; otherwise, the communication port is chosen by the system.

332

(socket-accept-connection socket)
(socket-accept-connection socket)
(socket-accept-connection socket)

socket-accept-connection waits for a client connection on the given socket. If no client is already waiting
for a connection, this procedure blocks its caller; otherwise, the ﬁrst connection request on the queue of
pending connections is connected to socket. This procedure must be called on a server socket created
with make-server-socket. The return value of socket-accept-connection is undeﬁned. The following
example is a simple server which waits for a connection on the port 1234. Once the connection with the
distant program is established, we read a line on the input port associated to the socket and we write the
length of this line on its output port. [Under Unix, you can simply connect to listening socket with the telnet
command. With the given example, this can be achieved by typing the command

telnet localhost 1234

in a shell window.]

(let ((s (make-server-socket 1234)))

(socket-accept-connection s)
(let ((l (read-line (socket-input s))))

(format (socket-output s) "Length is: ~A\n" (string-length l))
(flush (socket-output s)))

(socket-shutdown s))

(socket-shutdown socket)
(socket-shutdown socket)
(socket-shutdown socket)
(socket-shutdown socket close)
(socket-shutdown socket close)
(socket-shutdown socket close)

Socket-shutdown shuts down the connection associated to socket. Close is a boolean; it indicates if
the socket must be closed or not, when the connection is destroyed. Closing the socket forbids further
connections on the same port with the socket-accept-connection procedure. Omitting a value for close
implies closing the socket. The return value of socket-shutdown is undeﬁned. The following example shows
a simple server: when there is a new connection on the port number 1234, the server displays the ﬁrst line
sent to it by the client, discards the others and goes back waiting for further client connections.

(let ((s (make-server-socket 1234)))

(let loop ()

(socket-accept-connections)
(format #t "I’ve read: ~A\n" (read-line (socket-input s)))
(socket-shutdown s #f)
(loop)))

(socket-down? socket)
(socket-down? socket)
(socket-down? socket)

Returns #t if socket has been previously closed with socket-shutdown. It returns #f otherwise.

(socket-dup socket)
(socket-dup socket)
(socket-dup socket)

Returns a copy of socket. The original and the copy socket can be used interchangeably. However, if a new
connection is accepted on one socket, the characters exchanged on this socket are not visible on the other
socket. Duplicating a socket is useful when a server must accept multiple simultaneous connections. The
following example creates a server listening on port 1234. This server is duplicated and, once two clients are
present, a message is sent on both connections.

(define s1 (make-server-socket 1234))
(define s2 (socket-dup s1))
(socket-accept-connection s1)
(socket-accept-connection s2) ;; blocks until two clients are present
(display "Hello,\n" (socket-output s1))
(display "world\n" (socket-output s2))
(flush (socket-output s1))
(flush (socket-output s2))

333

(when-socket-ready socket handler)
(when-socket-ready socket handler)
(when-socket-ready socket handler)
(when-socket-ready socket)
(when-socket-ready socket)
(when-socket-ready socket)

If the special value #f is provided as handler, the current handler for socket is deleted.

Deﬁnes a handler for socket. The handler is a thunk which is executed when a connection is available
on socket.
If
a handler is provided, the value returned by when-socket-ready is undeﬁned. Otherwise, it returns the
handler currently associated to socket. This procedure, in conjunction with socket-dup, permits building
multiple-client servers which work asynchronously. Such a server is shown below.

(define p (make-server-socket 1234))
(when-socket-ready p
(let ((count 0))

(lambda ()

(set! count (+ count 1))
(register-connection (socket-dup p) count))))

(define register-connection

(let ((sockets ’()))
(lambda (s cnt)

;; Accept connection
(socket-accept-connection s)
;; Save socket somewhere to avoid GC problems
(set! sockets (cons s sockets))
;; Create a handler for reading inputs from this new connection
(let ((in (socket-input s))

(out (socket-output s)))

(when-port-readable in

(lambda ()

(let ((l (read-line in)))

(if (eof-object? l)

;; delete current handler
(when-port-readable in #f)
;; Just write the line read on the socket
(begin (format out "On #~A --> ~A\n" cnt l)

(flush out))))))))))

334

Concurrency

•
To work with the ideas in this section you should ﬁrst

(load "~cs61a/lib/concurrent.scm")

in order to get the necessary Scheme extensions.

Parallelism

Many things we take for granted in ordinary programming become problematic when there is any kind of
parallelism involved. These situations include

multiple processors (hardware) sharing data

software multithreading (simulated parallelism)

operating system input/output device handlers

•

•

•

This is the most important topic in CS 162, the operating systems course; here in 61A we give only a brief
introduction, in the hope that when you see this topic for the second time it’ll be clearer as a result.

To see in simple terms what the problem is, think about the Scheme expression

(set! x (+ x 1))

As you’ll learn in more detail in 61C, Scheme translates this into a sequence of instructions to your computer.
The details depend on the particular computer model, but it’ll be something like this:

lw

$8, x

addi $8, 1
$8, x
sw

; Load a Word from memory location x
; into processor register number 8.
; Add the Immediate value 1 to the register.
; Store the Word from register 8 back
; into memory location x.

Ordinarily we would expect this sequence of instructions to have the desired eﬀect. If the value of x was 100
before these instructions, it should be 101 after them.

But imagine that this sequence of three instructions can be interrupted by other events that come in the
middle. To be speciﬁc, let’s suppose that someone else is also trying to add 1 to x’s value. Now we might
have this sequence:

my process
----------

other process
-------------

lw
$8, x
addi $8, 1

[value is 100]
[value is 101]

lw
$9, x
addi $9, 1
$9, x
sw

[value is 100]
[value is 101]
[stores 101]

sw

$8, x

[stores 101]

The ultimate value of x will be 101, instead of the correct 102.

The general idea we need to solve this problem is the critical section, which means a sequence of instructions
that mustn’t be interrupted. The three instructions starting with the load and ending with the store are a
critical section.

335

Actually, we don’t have to say that these instructions can’t be interrupted; the only condition we must
enforce is that they can’t be interrupted by another process that uses the variable x. It’s okay if another
process wants to add 1 to y meanwhile. So we’d like to be able to say something like

reserve x
lw
addi
sw
release x

$8, x
$8, 1
$8, x

Levels of Abstraction

Computers don’t really have instructions quite like reserve and release, but we’ll see that they do provide
similar mechanisms. A typical programming environment includes concurrency control mechanisms at three
levels of abstraction:

SICP name
---------

What’s protected
----------------

Provided by
-----------

serializer

high level abstraction

programming language

(procedure, object, ...)

mutex

critical section

operating system

test-and-set!

one atomic

hardware

state transition

The serializer and the mutex are, in SICP, abstract data types. There is a constructor make-serializer
that’s implemented using a mutex, and a constructor make-mutex that’s implemented using test-and-set!,
which is a (simulated, in our case) hardware instruction.

Serializers

For now, let’s look at how this idea can be expressed at a higher level of abstraction, in a Scheme program.

(define x-protector (make-serializer))

(define protected-increment-x (x-protector (lambda () (set! x (+ x 1)))))

> x
100
> (protected-increment-x)
> x
101

We introduce an abstraction called a serializer. This is a procedure that takes as its argument another
procedure (call it proc). The serializer returns a new procedure (call it protected-proc). When invoked,
protected-proc invokes proc, but only if the same serializer is not already in use by another protected
procedure. Proc can have any number of arguments, and protected-proc will take the same arguments
and return the same value.

There can be many diﬀerent serializers, all in operation at once, but each one can’t be doing two things at
once. So if we say

(define x-protector (make-serializer))
(define y-protector (make-serializer))

336

(parallel-execute (x-protector (lambda () (set! x (+ x 1))))

(y-protector (lambda () (set! y (+ y 1)))))

then both tasks can run at the same time; it doesn’t matter how their machine instructions are interleaved.
But if we say

(parallel-execute (x-protector (lambda () (set! x (+ x 1))))

(x-protector (lambda () (set! x (+ x 1)))))

then, since we’re using the same serializer in both tasks, the serializer will ensure that they don’t overlap in
time.

I’ve introduced a new primitive procedure, parallel-execute. It takes any number of arguments, each of
which is a procedure of no arguments, and invokes them them, in parallel rather than in sequence. (This
isn’t a standard part of Scheme, but an extension for this section of the textbook.)

You may be wondering about the need for all those (lambda ()...) notations. Since a serializer isn’t a
special form, it can’t take an expression as argument. Instead we must give it a procedure that it can invoke.

Programming Considerations

Even with serializers, it’s not easy to do a good job of writing programs that deal successfully with concur-
rency. In fact, all of the operating systems in widespread use today have bugs in this area; Unix systems,
for example, are expected to crash every month or two because of concurrency bugs.

To make the discussion concrete, let’s think about an airline reservation system, which serves thousands of
simultaneous users around the world. Here are the things that can go wrong:

Incorrect results. The worst problem is if the same seat is reserved for two diﬀerent people. Just as
•
in the case of adding 1 to x, the reservation system must ﬁrst ﬁnd a vacant seat, then mark that seat as
occupied. That sequence of reading and then modifying the database must be protected.

Ineﬃciency. One very simple way to ensure correct results is to use a single serializer to protect the entire
•
reservation database, so that only one person could make a request at a time. But this is an unacceptable
solution; thousands of people are waiting to reserve seats, mostly not for the same ﬂight.

Deadlock. Suppose that someone wants to travel to a city for which there is no direct ﬂight. We must
•
make sure that we can reserve a seat on ﬂight A and a seat on connecting ﬂight B on the same day, before
we commit to either reservation. This probably means that we need to use two serializers at the same time,
one for each ﬂight. Suppose we say something like

(serializer-A (serializer-B (lambda () ...))))

Meanwhile someone else says

(serializer-B (serializer-A (lambda () ...))))

The timing could work out so that we get serializer A, the other person gets serializer B, and then we are
each stuck waiting for the other one.

Unfairness. This isn’t an issue in every situation, but sometimes you want to avoid a solution to the
If the high-priority

•
deadlock problem that always gives a certain process priority over some other one.
process is greedy, the lower-priority process might never get its turn at the shared data.

337

Implementing Serializers

A serializer is a high-level abstraction. How do we make it work? Here is an incorrect attempt to implement
serializers:

;;;;;
(define (make-serializer)

(let ((in-use? #f))
(lambda (proc)

In file cs61a/lectures/3.4/bad-serial.scm

(define (protected-proc . args)

(if in-use?

(begin

(wait-a-while)
(apply protected-proc args))

; Never mind how to do that.
; Try again.

(begin

(set! in-use? #t)
(apply proc args)
(set! in-use? #f))))

; Don’t let anyone else in.
; Call the original procedure.
; Finished, let others in again.

protected-proc)))

This is a little complicated, so concentrate on the important parts. In particular, never mind about the
scheduling aspect of parallelism—how we can ask this process to wait a while before trying again if the
serializer is already in use. And never mind the stuﬀ about apply, which is needed only so that we can
serialize procedures with any number of arguments.

The part to focus on is this:

(if in-use?
.......
(begin

; wait and try again

(set! in-use #t)
(apply proc args)
(set! in-use #f)))

; Don’t let anyone else in.
; Call the original procedure.
; Finished, let others in again.

The intent of this code is that it ﬁrst checks to see if the serializer is already in use. If not, we claim the
serializer by setting in-use true, do our job, and then release the serializer.

The problem is that this sequence of events is subject to the same parallelism problems as the procedure
we’re trying to protect! What if we check the value of in-use, discover that it’s false, and right at that
moment another process sneaks in and grabs the serializer? In order to make this work we’d have to have
another serializer protecting this one, and a third serializer protecting the second one, and so on.

There is no easy way to avoid this problem by clever programming tricks within the competing processes. We
need help at the level of the underlying machinery that provides the parallelism: the hardware and/or the
operating system. That underlying level must provide a guaranteed atomic operation with which we can
test the old value of in-use and change it to a new value with no possibility of another process intervening.
(It turns out that there is a very tricky software algorithm to generate guaranteed atomic test-and-set, but
in practice, there is almost always hardware support for parallelism. Look up “Peterson’s algorithm” in
Wikipedia if you want to see the software solution.)

The textbook assumes the existence of a procedure called test-and-set! with this guarantee of atomicity.
Although there is a pseudo-implementation on page 312, that procedure won’t really work, for the same
reason that my pseudo-implementation of make-serializer won’t work. What you have to imagine is
that test-and-set! is a single instruction in the computer’s hardware, comparable to the Load Word
instructions and so on that I started with. (This is a realistic assumption; modern computers do provide
some such hardware mechanism, precisely for the reasons we’re discussing now.)

338

The Mutex

The book uses an intermediate level of abstraction between the serializer and the atomic hardware capability,
called a mutex. What’s the diﬀerence between a mutex and a serializer? The serializer provides, as an
abstraction, a protected operation, without requiring the programmer to think about the mechanism by
which it’s protected. The mutex exposes the sequence of events. Just as my incorrect implementation said

(set! in-use #t)
(apply proc args)
(set! in-use #f)

the correct version uses a similar sequence

(mutex ’acquire)
(apply proc args)
(mutex ’release)

By the way, all of the versions in these notes have another bug; I’ve simpliﬁed the discussion by ignoring
the problem of return values. We want the value returned by protected-proc to be the same as the
value returned by the original proc, even though the call to proc isn’t the last step. Therefore the correct
implementation is

(mutex ’acquire)
(let ((result (apply proc args)))

(mutex ’release)
result)

as in the book’s implementation on page 311.

339